---
layout: post
title:  "Using Dataclasses for NYT Crossword Data"
date:   2024-05-22
categories: 
---

This is the second post in my series about working with my New York Times crossword data. You can see the first post [here](https://rococodes.github.io/2024/05/13/NYT-Crossword1.html) for background on the project and my first steps in visualizing data.

### Why Dataclasses? 

In the first post in this series, I pulled data from the NYT Crossword API in two separate calls. Eventually I'll want to do a bunch of things with this data: graph it, calculate trends, etc. But I need the data to be in a good format to do that. I need to create a class! This was my first time working with classes in Python so I started with the absolute basics. I knew that I only needed to store data from the API calls and not modify or do anything super complicated. With that in mind, I chose to store my crossword data for each puzzle in a dataclass instead of a normal class. For more information on dataclasses, check out the [documentation here](https://docs.python.org/3/library/dataclasses.html). Dataclasses make code much more concise and easy to read, getting rid of a lot of "underscore-heavy" methods that can get a little clunky.

### Crossword Dataclass

Here's how I defined my crossword dataclass:

```python
from dataclasses import dataclass

@dataclass
class Crosswordresult():
    date: str
    dayoftheweek: str
    star: str
    nytpuzzle_id: str
    timeseconds: int
    timemins: str
```
I started by thinking about which pieces of data from the API calls would be useful. I need the publish date to sort the puzzle chronologically, the day of the week to compare with other puzzles from the same day, and the star to check completion (In the NYT world, a Gold star means the puzzle is part of a streak and has been completed on time without using any app hints/autocheck). I then also want my time in total seconds, as well as the time in MIN:SEC for better readibility.

Now at this point, you might notice that some of the attributes in my class are not included directly in the API call, specifically ```dayoftheweek``` and ```timemins```. I'll have to modify some of my original data to get these fields.

### Formatting data from the request

Before I get into my actual API calls, I want to explain how I am going to get data into a usable format for some of my class attributes.

#### Turning total seconds into MIN:SEC

The crossword time results are returned as total seconds. This is great for graphing and sorting, but it's easier for us to read the total time in minutes. I wrote a function for taking a time in seconds and turning it into minute format:

```python
def minuteize(i):
    minute = int(i/60)
    second = i%60
    return f"{minute}:{second:02d}"
```

#### Getting day of the week from calendar date

Because puzzle difficulty depends on the day of the week it was published, I want to be able to classify each puzzle as a Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, etc. Then I'll compare based on day of the week. In the API data, we get calendar date but not day of the week. Here's a way to get day of the week, where Monday = 0, Tuesday = 1, etc. I'm using the format of my original data call, where ```print_date``` lives inside of a specific dictionary. The [datetime module](https://docs.python.org/3/library/datetime.html) is helpful here, and I use ```.strptime()``` to designate the format of the publish date.

```python
from datetime import datetime

date_format = '%Y-%m-%d'
for result in (repo_dicts):
    publishdate = result['print_date']
    formatted_date = (datetime.strptime(publishdate, date_format)).weekday()
```

But you can also write a function that looks something like

```python
from datetime import datetime

date_format = '%Y-%m-%d'
def weekdayize(i):
    formatted_date = (datetime.strptime(i, date_format)).weekday()
    return formatted_date
```


### Working with the API structure

If you remember my first post, I had to make two calls to the NYT API to get all the data I need. The first one takes a begin and end date as input and gives general information about the puzzles in that date range. Then the second call takes one puzzle ID as input (which is in the data pulled from the first call), and gives more specific information about your solve of the puzzle. To sum it up, you need to run the first call to get a list of puzzle IDs, then feed each ID one by one into the second call to get specific solve data. Sounds like a perfect place for a for loop.

I started with the same first API call, where I got puzzle information and put it into a list. This is copied from my first post, again with my NYT token redacted.

```python
url = "https://www.nytimes.com/svc/crosswords/v3/36569100/puzzles.json?publish_type=daily&date_start=2024-01-01&date_end=2024-04-01"
cookies = {'NYT-S': 'yourtokengoeshere'}
headers = {"accept": "application/json"}
r=requests.get(url, headers=headers, cookies=cookies)
response_dict = r.json()

repo_dicts = response_dict['results']
```
You'll notice that I had to manually enter begin and end dates for the request. In the next post I'll detail a way to run multiple requests to get the time span of my crossword streak (I'll probably write a function). Still, this works just to illustrate the class setup.

```python
crossworddata=[]
for result in (repo_dicts):
    puzz_id = result['puzzle_id']
    url = f"https://www.nytimes.com/svc/crosswords/v6/game/{puzz_id}.json"
    cookies = {'NYT-S': 'yourtokengoeshere'}
    headers = {"accept": "application/json"}
    c=requests.get(url, headers=headers, cookies=cookies)
    crossresponse_dict = c.json()

    crossrepo_dicts = crossresponse_dict['calcs']
    crossreposeconds = crossrepo_dicts['secondsSpentSolving']
    crossrepomins = minuteize(crossreposeconds)
    
    publishdate = result['print_date']
    starresult = result['star']
    formatted_date = weekdayize(publishdate)
    
    cw = Crosswordresult(date = publishdate, dayoftheweek = formatted_date, star = starresult, nytpuzzle_id = puzz_id, timeseconds = crossreposeconds, timemins = crossrepomins)

    crossworddata.append(cw)
```
Ok, there is a lot happening here. Before the for loop, I'm creating a list that I will fill with dataclasses, where each dataclass corresponds to a crossword puzzle and contains the data specified at the beginning of the post. 

The for loop takes each result from my previous API call and pulls the puzzle ID for each entry (puzzle) in that dictionary. Then that puzzle ID is fed to the second API call. After that, I'm pulling the time (in seconds) it took me to solve the puzzle. I also call my ```minuteize``` function to put the time in MIN:SEC format.

Then I pull some more data from the original API call for the particular puzzle ID. Here is where I call my ```weekayize``` function.

Now that I have all my variables in the for loop, I assign them as attributes to my ```Crosswordresult``` class. I end the loop by appending my list with the class I just created.

Here's a sample output for the first two puzzles of 2024:

``` python
Crosswordresult(date='2024-01-01', dayoftheweek=0, star='Gold', nytpuzzle_id=21588, timeseconds=151, timemins='2:31'),

Crosswordresult(date='2024-01-02', dayoftheweek=1, star='Gold', nytpuzzle_id=21607, timeseconds=302, timemins='5:02'),]
```

This is looking pretty goood. I think we might almost be ready to start graphing.

### Final Thoughts

The dataclass module is a perfect format for this project. I'm happy I took the time in my first post to really understand the API call and the data format (there is no documentation for the New York Times crossword API I could find online). This helped me so much when figuring out how to store the data in a helpful format, since I had an idea in my head of how the data was structured. If I need to pull new pieces of data from the API call, I'll be able to easily add that into the existing dataclass as well.

As for next steps, I have two major things to figure out: The best way to pull all of my data since I am limited to 100 puzzles in each data call, and the best way to graph my findings. Stay tuned for those blog posts coming soon.